How the hell do they know to be the same
temperature as each other to a
thousandth of a degree? In this room,
the temperature fluctuates by degrees.
Exactly. The whole universe is that.
When the universe was small and all
talking to itself in equilibrium,
temperature equilibrium, then it quickly
expanded. Hence the justification for
inflation. Yes. Right. Because all of
that expansion all at once, it gives you
the uniformity across the entire
expansion. Correct. Wow. Okay, I'm done.
We need a cosmic Aquarius. Come back.
This is Star Talk. Neil deGrasse Tyson
here, your personal astrophysicist.
We're doing cosmic queries today. And
guess who brought them all? Chuck. Nice
Chuck, man. Hey, that's right. I I
bought the goods. You You brought the
goods? Yes, I did. We got the We got all
the We got everything that you ever
wanted to know. And I'm going to read
four of them
cuz that's how many we get. But I think
we but they're very fleshy replies when
we do that. I I the way I look at it is
we have a reservoir of inquiries and
that gives us fodder for discussion and
eventually all of these questions will
be answered. All right. And these
questions all from our Patreon
supporters which we we love them. We
love. We're going to do cosmology today.
Oh, I I did my hair very special today.
So, I'm very happy about that. I'm glad
that we're doing cosmetology.
Cosmetology. Yeah, that's what it is.
So, we've got with us today one of the
most active scientists in that space,
the space of cosmetology,
[Laughter]
Brian Keading. Brian, welcome to Star
Talk. It's nice to be with you in person
finally. Right. Yes. Yes. Uh you you're
active on social media and I was honored
to be a guest on your podcast. Yeah. Two
time guest. Yeah. Two time guest. And
what's the name of it? It's called the
Into the Impossible podcast named after
Arthur C. Clark's famous dictim that the
only way of discovering the limits of
the possible is to go beyond them into
the impossible. Oh. Uh, did he realize
that once you get into the impossible,
it is the possible? Well, I don't know
if
you realize too rational about this,
Chuck. You've been uh thinking about
cosmology, especially uh signatures of
the Big Bang. Yeah. Uh your whole
career. Yeah. This is what I've been
doing. I dedicated my life to
understanding, you know, what happened
on the Tuesday before the Big Bang. Can
you answer that question? Not really
sure. Tuesday. Wait, let me get your
pedigree out of the way here. So, you're
chancellor's distinguished professor of
physics in the department of physics, UC
San Diego, right? But are you the
students distinguished professor? You
know, well, I don't care what the
chancellor thinks of you. Wow.
I just teach to
him, right? You go to his office, you
get private lessons. That's funny. Uh
you're also a principal investigator in
the Simons Observatory. We've got a
whole Simons thing down here in in the
city at the Flat Iron Institute. That's
right. Yeah. Jim is a titan of the city.
Fortunately passed away last year, age
86. Jim Simons. Jim Simons. Yeah. He's a
philanthropist, a mathematician. He was
had multiple careers. He worked for the
government. He broke codes in during
Vietnam. You said philanthropist and
mathematician, but not in that order.
Not in that order. And also for I
reverse order. I left out one thing. a
hedge fund manager, 26th richest person
in the world. But one one thing that's
most important I left out uh is uh is
that his wife Marilyn Simons has the
distinction and honor not only of having
an asteroid. I mean a lot of people have
asteroids, but we got an asteroid named
after Jim. Anybody's got an asteroid.
Well, yeah. Duh. But Marilyn, let's be
honest, the solar system is littered
with them.
They're basically space garbage.
Let's be honest. Can't give them away.
This is the man who does not have an
ass. Join me. Join you and me both. I
don't have one either. But uh but
Marilyn has the honor, the distinction
of being my one of my first babysitters.
So she got experience early experience
with dark matter. Did she change her
diapers? That's right. Dark matter is
where she got her experience with Wow.
Yeah. Age age two or three. Yeah. Wow.
So you guys go way back. Way back before
the before the birth, before my own
personal big bang, as Chuck said, nine
months earlier.
Uh so uh what's up with the Simon
Observatory? What's your relationship to
it again? So I'm the what's called the
principal investigator. Yeah. So uh I'm
the co-founder of it along with your
friend David Spurggle and Mark uh we
came up together in graduate school and
Yeah. Yeah. David Spurggle is on an
earlier episode of Star Talk as the
chair of the committee representing NASA
investigating UAPs. Yes. Yeah. And he's
also in our archives. He's also the he
took over from Marilyn Simons as a
president of the Simons Foundation.
Okay. So he had to kind of withdraw from
the Simons Observatory otherwise have
conflict of interest of interest. I mean
what is that? Is that a thing? Is that
what what
really for people like David? Yeah. Very
ethical people. Yeah. So um so in 2014
in this very city there was published in
in the uh front page of the New York
Times on March 17th St. Patrick's Day
was published on an article that said
space ripples herald the origin of the
universe. And it was an announcement
that the bicep 2 experiment had detected
what are called gravitational waves,
primordial waves of the ripples of
spaceime. So bicep uh that's an acronym.
What's that acronym for? I created the
acronym. It was a background imager of
cosmic extragalactic polarization.
Checking his bicep. You want something?
You want? Yeah, exactly. I don't
disc What's it looking at? Space guns.
guns. Okay, so give me back the acronym
the space gun show background background
imager of cosmic extragalactic
polarization. Now, why is that so
clever? Why is that not just a dad joke?
Well, the signal that we're looking for
is called polarization. And that
polarization pattern, if you were to be
able to see it with special polarized
glasses, we'll get to in a few seconds,
you would see a swirling, twisting, or
curling pattern. So, I wanted to make
bicep the muscle that does curl. And I
got away with the dad joke even before I
had kids. I see what you did there. See
what you did there. That's not bad.
Curl. Tell is only exercises one muscle.
No other muscle. Curl is the bicep.
That's right. All right. Very good. So
yeah. So So what were you on that
project? I was the Well, I founded the
previous predecessor experiment called
creatively bicep one. It was the first
incarnation of it. And just like with
your iPhone, every couple years you
upgrade it. You get more pixels. You get
more detail. But the cool thing about
it, literally it's at the Isn't
orbiting? No, it's in the South Pole,
Antarctica. Oh, so it's at the very
bottom of the world. Oh my gosh. Yeah,
that's right. Um and so penguins would
call it the top of the world, but that's
right. I don't want to be too, you know,
polar bear specific. Yeah. So we uh so I
created that experiment along with my
late great um colleague and mentor
Andrew Lang. Uh tragically took his own
life soon after we got our first data
from the second version of the
experiment, but that's another podcast.
Uh but that experiment was was built
intently to do nothing else but measure
these waves of gravity if they existed.
And we thought, "Oh, we'll never detect
it. It's it's minuscule. We're looking
for signals that are 1 billionth of a
Kelvin above the CMBB's average
temperature, which is 2.7 Kelvin." So it
says minuscule. We didn't think we'd do
it. We had to try it. So the challenge
there scientifically is to see a signal
that low given the fluctuations that are
already there and the earth and the
atmosphere. Yep. It's all radiating into
the into the experiment. That's right.
Exactly. Yep. It's it's literally like a
string with a bell on it.
But the crazy thing is in in 2014, you
know, we announced we did it. We saw
this kind of needle, you know, in a it's
actually like a piece of hay in a hay
stack, you know. It's so Can you find
the hay in the hay stack? That's funny.
Piece of hay.
That's funny. You know what you do with
the needle? You actually Iron Man said
this in in one of the movies, but we all
knew this. Okay. If you want to find
needle in the haststack, just burn down
the hay stack and the needle's left. And
that's all, right? Cuz needles don't
burn or take an electromagnet and yeah,
you'll find the needle like that. So, so
this experiment was designed to do one
thing only. And we never thought we'd do
it. If we detected it, we'd be, you
know, kind of the onus is on the
experimentalist. You know, you want to
know enough that you can detect it, but
you have to, you know, not fall victim
to the most pernicious of all scientific
fallacies, which is confirmation bias.
You're looking for something. Oh, you
found it. Eureka. That never happens,
right? But we did. We found it. And I
remember telling my wife, you know, this
is going to win somebody a Nobel Prize.
You know, spoiler alert, you know, my
first book's called Losing the Nobel
Prize. So, it wasn't wasn't this guy.
Um, and it wasn't any of us because it
was retracted later on as Neil
mentioned, we had to do go through the
humiliation of after being on the front
page of the New York Times, press
conference at Harvard, you know, a real
show all around the world, CNN,
everybody. So, what was your academic
affiliation at the time? So, I was a
professor at UC San Diego where you are
now. Correct. I've been there 21 years.
So, they probably were running with
this. Oh, yeah. We were on the front
page of the the most the most important
paper of record, the San Diego Union
Tribune, which The Union Tribune. I was
on the cover of it. Yes. Exactly. So
that discovery launched into motion what
would become the Simons Observatory
because that day I got a call from Jim
Simons. He had already been funding a
predecessor experiment of mine called
the Simons array which is a small
grouping of telescopes meant to also
look at the same signals but other
signals too. And he called me up in that
distinctive voice uh after you know
smoking Merit cigarettes without filters
you know for 60 years. He started
smoking when he was in his you know late
teenage don't do that out there you know
doctors about yeah he was a chain
smoker. Hey Brian, how are you? Exactly
what he sounded like. More Boston. I
just got more Boston. Oh, I can't do
Boston.
Plus, it doesn't sound good in Boston,
you know. Oh, that's wicked. Like, you
know,
wicked. Like, yeah, that's the diner
waitress voice really. Yeah. Yeah. Brian
Keating and his team are helping us
piece together one of the biggest
puzzles in cosmology, dark matter and
energy. But new findings may be shaking
up everything we thought we knew. Data
suggests dark energy might be weakening,
meaning the universe's expansion could
actually be slowing down. If true, it
would challenge one of the biggest
assumptions in modern physics. But
before we rewrite the textbooks, we need
clarity. That's exactly why Star
continues to partner with Ground News.
They built an app and website that helps
us separate speculation from science.
With one swipe, we can find original
research and highly factual sources
covering the most complex breakthroughs
in
cosmology. They were actually founded by
a former NASA engineer with the same
level of precision you'd expect for
space missions. But the best part,
ground news isn't some new tool to
learn. They're a smarter, better version
of how you're already staying informed.
So follow every major development from
dark energy to deep space with interest
pages tailored to the topics you care
about most. We're giving our viewers
40% off the same unlimited access
vantage plan we use. Just go to ground
news.star talk or scan this QR code to
bring the cost of context and clarity
down to $5 a month. Now back to the
show. So, we left
off in your complicated life where you
had the Bicep 2 experiment that reported
what would later be determined to be an
erroneous detection. Meanwhile,
Jim Simons,
seeing what you're seeking, Yeah. wanted
to participate in that put you head of
an early version of the Simons
Observatory, some variant, Simon's
array, some Yeah. But then the Bicep 2
result comes out. That's right. Which is
not good for him. That's right. Because
Bicep 2 is leading the world to Well, we
think has has discovered this these
these ripples. Exactly. But but really
they haven't. But he doesn't know that.
So he's like, "Bro, what's up with my
money?" Right. Okay. I want it back. So
he calls me up and I'm like, I don't
know what to say because I knew in the
back of my mind there could be problems
with the result and we might need to
confirm it with another instrument,
which later turned out to be the case or
that we were actually right. And yeah,
maybe I might have to say, "Look, you
got to get I got to give you back your
money. I got to have some integrity and
you know, and refund your money, so to
speak." And I was going crazy cuz where
do you get, you know, $10 million and
give it back to Adam? No, that's Let me
tell you something. That's when I just
ran out of integrity.
We ran out of money and integrity at the
same time. 10 out of 10 $10 million. No
more integrity.
So then how was it determined? Yeah, cuz
I I remembered this. I wasn't close to
it, but it was it was happening. It was
a very important it was an important
episode in science actually. Okay. So
now tell me why it's so important. Can I
before you even get there, can you tell
me exactly what was missing from the
discovery that invalidated? Absolutely.
Let me take one giant step back. Why are
we doing any of these projects to begin
with? So looking for gravitational
waves. Take yourself back to 2014,
right? We hadn't detected LIGO had not
made its detection of gravitational
waves. Obama was president.
Ukraine had not been invaded the first
time. Hold on, guys. Give me one second.
I'm staving off. Once he said Obama was
president, I'm like, "Oh god." The
elevator had not been risen. Okay, go
ahead. How to how to annoy Chuck. Uh so,
so at that phase, we had not detected
gravitational waves directly as LIGO
had. We had an indirect evidence that
they existed, but uh but there was a
theory that had been promagated since
the early 1980s by Alan Guth. So, the
inflationary theory is the answer to the
question, what caused the big bang? What
made the big bang bang? And the postula
is that there's a so-called quantum
field that filled the whole universe
that fluctuated out of nothing and the
universe became came into existence as
quantum quant.
They do stuff out of nothing all the
time. They are the magicians of the
universe. Yes. Everything quantum
actually pull the universe out of my
hand. That's exactly what
they universe over there on a
fluctuation. There you go. All right. So
this discovery, if it were true, if it
were confirmed, would be tantamount to
discovering the big bang itself, which
it was done not far from here by Pensas
and Wilson. Discovery of the CMBB, the
cosmic microwave background, which is
what butters the bread around the Keing
house. Pius Wilson at Bell Labs in
Jersey. Exactly. Not too far from here.
State, too. By the way, it's across the
Hudson River. That makes it far. That's
right. Okay. I know you you're in here
from San Diego. Don't Don't listen to
Long Island. He's a man. I'm a New
Yorker. He lives in New Jersey. So
that is true. You have Long Island
roots. Uh yeah, that's Stony Brook.
Yeah, Stony. Oh my god. Yeah, that's
where Jim and my dad were professor. Oh,
that's why that would be the case. So,
so inflation. So, we claimed that we
discovered this. So, that's why everyone
said this is going to win a Nobel Prize
because they won a Nobel Prize for
discovering just the heat left over from
the big bang. All the more so for
discovering what ignited the spark that
ignited the big bang. So, that was why I
designed Bicep originally. Then it
became bicep 2 like the iPhone gets new
detectors, cameras, we upgraded it. So
we ended up building this telescope and
then when I got this call from Jim
Simons I was in this pickle right
because I don't know what to say. I kind
of invented I was kind of the father of
the predecessor experiment to bicep 2
bicep one and you know I was definitely
the father of that and and then I was
involved with this new project that he
was funding. Now what ended up happening
was we had relied on data not from our
own instrument actually someone had
taken a picture of a PowerPoint slide
from our arch nemesis the plank
experiment. So the plank experiment is a
billion euro experiment. BICEP was a
mere$10 million US dollar. The European
Space Agency out at L2range point
orbiting around the sun, the Earth,
farthest, coldest, deepest, darkest,
incredible team. Thousand people
working. So Earth Sun L2. Earth Sun L2.
That's where JWSC is. Yeah, exactly. It
was one of the first. It was the second
one after hanging out. They're just
chilling. They're chilling like they're
on steakout. Two cops on Steakout
sitting there at L2.
You should you go for coffee this time.
I went for coffee last time. It is true
cuz they're like parked there. Yeah. As
Earth orbits the sun. Think about
getting a validation out there. I mean,
that is not easy. So, Jim calls me up.
What's going on and what to do next? So,
we ended up discovering that we didn't
see this pattern that would be the
impromaturtor of the Big Bang. We didn't
see this cosmic swirling curls from the
big bang. Who determined you didn't see
it? We along with our competitor the
plank teams that we worked together to
find out that actually what we saw was
nothing more than some cosmic schmutz,
right? Some dust. It was people who
study dust call it. That's right. To
them it's their livelihood. One
astronomer's dust is another
astronomer's Nobel lost Nobel Prize. So
it wasn't a blunder joke. It wasn't like
we left, you know, put our thumb over
the over the camera or something like
that. We actually measured exquisitly
precisely this signal that is
astrophysical in origin at the mill
billions of degree Kelvin level. I mean
it's an exquisite. So but it's a local
signal not a big happened to be a
different signal. Exactly. That's all.
So so congratulations on the precision
of the merit. You idiot interpreting it
the wrong way. However, what it did was
it's like oh this thing works. This
experiment basically it's the most
precise measurement of what's called an
astrophysical foreground. something in
the in the foreground in the you know
space between you and the cosmos that is
made in the astrophysics is actually the
same material that makes up meteorites
and I brought some meteorites for you
guys here. So dust is ubiquitous and the
same type of dust that obscured our
measurement and prevented me from
winning a Nobel prize is actually the
same stuff that the planets are made of
and so it's identical to that happens to
be magnetic and it produces radiation
and heat and so we saw it and we
misinterpreted it as the signal from the
baby produces um infrared infrared and
microwave emission. Yep. So Jin Simons
upon hearing this he's like well what do
we do and then when we retracted the
claim that we had detected inflation
humiliating this is a hum this is not
like an easy thing to do still he said I
want to go for the signal more than ever
now but we have to remove the dust so
it's a good thing like you said Chuck
it's actually a good thing when you make
a mistake you say oh I got to refine
what I do it's like you go out to your
car there's dust on the windshield I got
to clean the windshield no except you're
not going out to the uni the galaxy and
removing the dust you're removing the
dust signature in your data exactly how
do you do that without a vacuum cleaner
or a dust devil, you need ways to do
that. Exactly. So, so what Jim was was
wise about and what David Spurggle had
figured out cuz he was one of the ones
that killed off the bicep
interpretation. He figured out we need
to have multiple colors of light. Bicep
2 only had one color of light. We
couldn't see multiple colors. And when
you have multiple colors, you learn
about the spectrum. You learn about the
characteristics. So, what Simon's
Observatory now does and why Jim funded
that is it can see the cosmic signal. If
it's there, we have to assume it may not
be there just because we want it to be
there, but it can also see the dust. And
when you have the signal, you have the
cosmic signal plus the dust signal. We
have a telescope that just saying in
your one band of light. Exactly. You
could not distinguish the cosmic signal
from the local signal. In two bands of
light, they each will show up
differently in two bands. And now you'll
be able to identify. And now you've been
able to take it and take it out. But
that's not what I remember most about
this episode. I I remember the ambulance
chasing theorists who came behind this
false result, thinking it's real, coming
up with an explanation so they can get
their Nobel Prize, too. That's right.
Wow. That's what I remember. I got email
like 100 theories. How many theories?
Well, there's 1,800 papers published
about it's my most cited paper,
embarrassingly enough. Um but yeah so so
it was it led to so this this this
disaster in some sense led to the you
know initiation of this new most
powerful instrument ever made to do the
cosmic micro background and that's
that's the science observatory science
of which you are PI congratulations
thank you very much yeah that's very
cool that's a great story we got we got
to get to oh he should write a book
about it we're all familiar with
Polaroid sunglasses
and some subset of those who own
know what they're doing, but I think
most people don't. It's just a type of
sunglasses that you want. I always have
polarized sunglasses with me in my
backpack just cuz you never know when
you need to pull you need to hide from
the paparazzi
and their flash might bounce off of
something. So, I need to I need
polarizing sunglasses to block out that
bounce light. So, so catch us all up on
how my polarized observations work.
Yeah. So, light has three primary
properties. its color spectrum, its
intensity, how bright the light is, and
also something called its polarization,
least familiar property of light. And
light is an electromagnetic wave. So
when a wave oscillates, the plane that
it's oscillating up and down in, the
electric field vectors are going up,
down, like that. And the magnetic field
vectors are going like that. So it's two
waves. One's going up and down, but the
other sorry to That's right. One's going
up and down, the other one is going side
to side.
Magnetic electromagnetic.
Okay. And when light interacts with
matter, you see like a glare. You see a
reflection there. Well, what polarized
sunglasses do is that they oppress and
suppress one of those
oppress. Come on. You see, you're
sitting between two people here who take
a different understanding of that word.
The show does know that one day. That's
right. We going to be able to get
through. See the mountain top using the
polariz. See the other side.
You know, sometimes I just feel tired
like I'm tide light. Tired light.
Oh man, we got to get all of this into
the B-roll. All right, good. The way
that polarized sunglasses work is that
they actually suppress one of the two
polarization states of light. It happens
to be the horizontal one. And that's why
you want to wear them at the beach or
you want to wear them when you're
driving because you get that glare or
skiing. Absolutely. Yeah. Absolutely.
your skin and that's why they're more
expensive because you have to add this
film that's has molecules that are
actually made of polymers that actually
suppress one of those two states of
light but let the rest in because you
don't want to be totally dark. Right. So
polarized sunglasses suppress one of the
two polarization states of light. They
make the light 50% darker. Also in
photography called neutral density
filter. Exactly. Yeah. So the film
that's on these uh on these glasses
actually knocks out one of the two
polarization states of light. The one
that is responsible for the glare that
youare. So that means if you have two of
them and if they are oriented just
right. Let's try that. So here's some
light coming through. Okay. So this a
very expensive demo here. So this is
this is actually knocking out half of
the light in there cuz only half it's an
unpolarized source. So half of it's
polarized one way, half it's polarized
the other way. The source is
unpolarized. And then if you put another
polarized source in front of it and I as
I rotate it eventually the axis of
polarization will be orthogonal and that
will block out 100% of the light. Do you
see perpendicular? There it is. So now
it's completely orthogonal or
perpendicular as as you would say. Uh
and then if I as I rotate it slightly
the offaxis now lets in some light. So
that's how polarization works. That's
why you can see through the glare. It
doesn't affect your eyes. It doesn't
hurt your eyes when you're skiing as you
said. Um and so that's what these
instruments are doing. They're looking
for polarization not of optical light
but of microwave light from the Big
Bang. The leftover heat from the Big
Bang. So remember I said inflation.
Inflation is this theory that there was
this quantum field that fluctuated that
produced everything that we know and
love about the big bang. It would also
produce what are called gravitational
waves. Waves in the fabric of spaceime
itself. Th those waves would perturb the
electrons, the protons, early hydrogen
atoms in the universe. When the CMBB or
cosmic microwave background was produced
about 400,000 years after the big bang
when light interacts with matter, as you
see from the glare, it becomes
polarized. That matter would be polar.
that matter in its orientation would
change depending on how much
gravitational wave energy was present
when the CMBB was produced. So it's
actually a gravitational wave detector.
We're using the photons of the cosmic
background as a type of film if you will
and onto which these waves of gravity if
they exist and only if they exist they
get they get a polarization to them a
curling twisting tw pattern of
polarization that called we call it B
mode polarization. Wow. So, it's a it's
a lot of logical steps, but actually
it's it's very well tested and very well
theorized. It just hasn't been detected
yet. It's quality physics going into
that. Yeah, that's super cool, man.
Yeah, literally. And we have to use we
can't use, you know, we can't use an
iPhone. We got to cool our detectors
down to my colleague Suzanne Stags at
Princeton. Uh she's built detectors that
operate at 0.1 degree above absolute
zero, right? Using isotopes of helium
and she does incredible stuff and
they're superconducting detectors.
They're basically little thermometers.
So, you know, you go outside and not in
New York, but in San Diego, you go
outside, you can see the sun with your
hand. You can basically detect where the
sun is using its infrared and that your
skin can absorb infrared heat. Well, so
too, we can have detectors that can see
microwaves and infrared radiation and
but they have to operate where it's
really cold. Otherwise, it's like
building, you know, the biggest, you
know, James Web space telescope and
putting it in Manhattan. And so what's
the fluctuation of temperature that
you're looking for between what the
universe has cooled to and what would
have been present uh right at the big
bang. Yeah. Exactly. Exactly what we're
looking for. So there'll be deviations
in about a part in a billion. So a
nanoelvin. So in other words, if if the
universe on average is about 2.7 Kelvin,
it would be 2.7 plus a nano Kelvin in
that direction and 2.7US 1 nano kel. So
you're looking at the nth decimal place,
right? So a billionth degree
billionthion of a degree above from Wait
and somebody gave you money to do this.
Wait. So wow. So here's what that's
insane. So let me drive home why we need
inflation. Okay. Okay. Because let me
tell you why. Okay. Because we're going
through a transition.
Okay. In this direction it's 2.7. What's
the Give me a few more decimal places.
2.726. It's 2.726 degrees in that
direction in the universe. Okay. And I
look in the other direction, right? It's
2.76 degrees, right? And and how the
hell do they know to be the same
temperature as each other to a
thousandth of a
degree room? Y the temperature
fluctuates by degrees. Exactly. By whole
degrees. In this corner, that corner,
over there, near a lamp. the whole
universe is that that's right just one.
And so so what what Guth said was the
way to get that to be the case when the
universe was small and all talking to
itself in equilibrium temperature
equilibrium then it quickly expanded
right like so fast it couldn't go out of
equilibrium with itself. So it all has
the the markings of that same
temperature from a bajillion years ago.
That's so cool. Hence the justification
for inflation. Yes. Yes. Because all of
that expansion all at once, it gives you
the uniformity across the entire
expansion. Correct. Wow. Correct. Okay,
I'm done. We need you to call an
Aquarius. Come back. L2. He's going to
call the steak out. Oh my god. Yeah,
that's insane. It is insane. I mean,
that is literally I mean, who thinks
like this? Who thinks like this?
My god. Wow. That's brilliant. I mean
that's that's that's really So the
inflation explains it. But then we
needed a cause for the inflation and
they we had to pull that out of our ass.
What was that? Basically I mean it
results as related to what's called the
multiverse. You know basically without
the multiverse you don't get inflation
in most models according to most and
that's causes some people like there's a
phase transition right. There's a phase
transition. Yeah. And the the actual
dynamics of it can be explained using
quantum field theory, which is a theory
everywhere in space. There's a quantum
field. Okay, you guys, right now you
sound like an episode of Star Trek.
Next generation. Next generation. They
love phrase phase
transitions and let's get to the
questions now. Come on. Okay. All right.
Oh, man. I got so excited I put the
Hello, Dr. Tyson, Dr. heating uh
10-year-old Reuben and six-year-old Eli
here from Harrisburg, PA. All right. If
everything was compacted into one tiny
dot, smaller than a speck of dust before
the Big Bang, uh what indeed formed the
dust? What was around prior to the Big
Bang? Doesn't this mean that there was
another universe that collapsed to form
ours? So, what's the deal? I wish that
those uh young people would have said I
have a very simple question for you. You
know b they're basically asking what
caused the big caused the universe to
start expanding in the first place. So
the the mark of a good scientist should
be we don't know we don't know for sure
and there are alternative that's what he
says when he doesn't know something.
It's the mark of a good scientist when
he doesn't know. That's right. My wife
sends me to the to the grocery store of
a crappy scientist who should have known
and doesn't. Right. Okay. Well that's
why we call it research. you know my my
PhD what you mean is it is not known in
the field not that you don't know it
exactly but perhaps you should we are
trying to know the answer we as the full
community yes the community of
scientists but specifically on the
Simons observatory their very question
is the question the Simons observatory
is in part designed to answer was there
was there any sense Stephen Hawking used
to say it's nonsensical to ask what
happened before the big bang because
time came into existence I was gonna say
he said it's like asking what's north of
the north pole which we all Oh, Santa
Claus, right? There's got to be Santa
Claus up there. But in reality, we can
answer that question in the affirmative.
As you actually hinted at, there could
have been a universe that existed
beforehand that actually collapsed and
what we used to call a big crunch. Now
we call it a bounce. They're actually
some of the most eminent theorists on
Earth, including those that I never like
crunch cuz that implies it's brittle and
it makes a crackling sound, but it's
serial revenue and delicious.
Anything with the word crunch in it has
got to be good. Captain, how do they
punctuate that?
Uh so uh so the actual answer is we're
trying to determine not what happened
because in science you can't prove
something happened like you can prove 1
plus 1 equals 2 or 1* 1 equals two as
you tell our mutual friend Terrence uh
but but in reality we can't prove a m a
physical fact but we can falsify
alternative models. So if we see this
twisting, roing twisting pattern of
polarization called curl modes or B
modes that will falsify the other models
that there was a big crunch that there
was a a previous existing universe in a
cyclical model. So we can prove those
wrong in uh getting more data about this
if we do see it that would be the
deathnell for the alternative models and
that would be a huge triumph in in the
history of cosmology. Okay. So you don't
know the answer. Okay, next question.
There we go. All right. Glad we cleared
that up. All right. This is uh No, it's
good. It's good to know that floating
ideas do have ways of being tested.
Exactly. And rejected because some
things you can just conjecture anything
literally like thousands of theorists
did that are consistent after the fact.
But the key thing is to do it before.
You want a prediction, not a
post-diction. Exactly. Retro. Retro.
Good day, gentlemen. This is Matt from
Oklahoma. My burning question about is
about the origins of the universe. What
exactly are we trying to gain by looking
into the past? Will it help advance the
population on Earth in a technological
standpoint? Or is it solely for the
history books?
Well, I I got a feeling that uh Matt D
has a little problem with your work. But
but as polite as that was, he's really
questioning your existence. Yeah, that's
right. Yeah, I have to justify it to
myself and the taxpayers as well. Um and
I don't mind that. And actually, I want
to ask you guys that as they step in
because Matt's not here. Uh what's the
most What's your favorite day on the
calendar every year? My favorite. My
birthday. Your birthday. What about you,
Neil? I like the four cardinal points.
Okay. Of the calendar. Yeah. Okay. So,
what are those? The equinoxes and the
solstesses. Okay. Okay.
You know what? When he was like, I like
the four cardinal points, I was like,
Jesus, Neil. But but then but then I I
was like, oh my god, he actually does.
Cuz as long as I've known him, he's the
only person that points those days out
to you. Like if we're texting on that
day, he will point out to you like all
those days. I look forward to those days
because that's when he's on Twitter. I
know that's the only time. That's what I
am. That's correct. So go ahead. So uh
you mentioned it and it's related to
yours. So it's your birthday. What is a
birthday? What is Some people say
Christmas, their anniversary, the kids'
birthday, whatever you want. Uh but it's
a beginning. And why do you like that?
Because you have no idea from firsthand
evidence what happened before you were
born. Do you Chuck? You have to rely on
other people's witness eyewitness
testimony. Well, I had video. Oh my god,
I don't want to see that.
No, he he was reincarnated, so he has he
had his own big crunch, too. Uh, so
people want to know what happened before
they came here. It's ultimate in
history, and that fulfills a need in us.
Like, does knowing history create, you
know, some excess GDP or no, but it's
part of being a well-rounded, educated,
civilized society. And knowing the
answers to the big questions is what
makes us different from the animals.
We're the only people. Homo sapien means
one who is wise. Not one who knows. It's
one who is wise. So we have wisdom. That
is to ask questions that perhaps have no
answer, but that's what makes us unique
and different from all other species.
Okay. Listen, I'm I I think my existence
I think you I think you defended
yourself well. Yeah. Okay. All right.
We'll give him that. So there you go,
Matt. Give me some more. Here we go.
This is Alan Ryer who says, "Hello, Dr.
Tyson. Dr. Keing, I always wondered how
and when will CMB last in our frame of
reference? When will radio waves kick
in? Should I say C RB?
Oo, I like that. Let me let me preamble
that by saying radio waves at one point
in our not that distant
past included what would later be called
microwaves, right? And microwaves were
simply small radio waves. micro waves
and they're really like a few
centimeters but and radio waves are even
longer than that. So uh so historically
it's still radio waves but but since we
have a word for it we use it the small
radio waves we call microwaves. Okay,
pick it up from there. So the uh the the
if you go out into the universe and you
make a little box and it's one cubic
centimeter. Okay, inside of that box
will be mostly nothing. There might be
maybe maybe you know a proton or nutrino
but mostly there'll be 419 photons from
the big bang and they all have an
average wavelength of about 2
millimeters on average there's a spread
it's a black body so that 2 millimeter
wavelength over time has stretched from
much much shorter wavelengths inf uh
from you know before that it was
infrared then it was optical then it was
ultraviolet and eventually it was
gammaray when the universe came into
existence highly energetic wait I don't
think that was a
photon that you can describe that way
moving through the volume
before recombination right oh yeah I
know it was yeah you can think can you
yeah recom I'm think of the free photon
since then that's a temperature from
which it think but you're saying we're
okay we can extrapolate back to you can
go before that it's just not a free
photon it's not it's not a yeah it's
scattering it's a scattered photon okay
just just as you did that video recently
that's beautiful about how long it takes
for a photon to get out of the sun oh
yes Okay, tightly tightly coupled matter
and radiation. The universe been
expanding and cooling. So eventually it
will get into the radio waves but you
know keep paying your taxes because
that's going to take billions of years.
Universe has to go expand by more than a
factor of 10 from where it is now which
could take more than a factor of 10
times the age of the universe because
the wavelength 10 times bigger is
basically when we start calling it a
radio wave. Okay. So the universe has to
be 10 times bigger because it's
stretching into the universe. Exactly.
That's so cool. So the answer is yes.
Yeah. Yeah. You're just not going to see
it, buddy. I don't know if you want to
spend money on the on the trademark of
that, right? But but but just to
clarify, before it was the cosmic
microwave background, it was the cosmic
visible background. Yeah. Or infrared or
infrared background, then the cosmic
visible cosmic uh uh optical. Well,
visible. Yeah. And then ultraviolet on
the other side. And with a cosmic x-ray
background and then gamay background.
That's right. Yep. There you go. Okay. I
love it. Hey Star Talk fans, I don't
know if you know this, but the audio
version of the podcast actually posts a
week in advance of the video version and
you can get that in Spotify and Apple
Podcast and most other podcast outlets
that are out there. Multiple ways to
ingest all that is cosmic on Star Talk.
This is uh yog who says, "Hello Lord
Nice Dr. Keing and my personal
astrophysicist I love that uh yogas from
Nagpur India. My question is, is the
CMBB anisotropy really random? For those
who may not know, what is anisotropy?
Means not isotropic, right? That makes
sense. And why would it be and then not
just why isn't it just a a isotropic ac?
Okay. So, so tell me about isotropy.
Yeah. So, isotropy is the feature that
you have complete uniformity and things
look the same and they are the same
homogeneity. It's similar in position in
every direction that you look which way
you point the telesc. So if you're ever
flying on an airplane and you're in the
cloud, you go through a cloud. You go
through a cloud. Yeah. And that cloud to
you when you look out the window, it
looks perfectly isotropic. Anywhere you
look out the window. And if you're in
the same brightness, it's the same
bright. It kind of looks like you're
inside of a ping-pong ball. Everything
is the same brightness and intensity.
That's isotropic. That's perfect
isotropy. The principle of looking the
same everywhere. But anisotropy just
means fluctuations from that from that
amount. So it's not that. It's not that.
in one sp one space you'll see something
different than you look in the other
space. That's right. Now, if the
universe were perfectly symmetric at
earlier times, the amount of matter was
the same everywhere. The amount of dark
matter was the same everywhere, any
exotic particles, everything was exactly
identical, the universe would have no
way to know where it should form a
cluster of galaxies, a single galaxy, a
planet, etc., etc., right? So if you had
perfect isotropy and Isaac Newton
realized this 300 plus years ago,
perfect isotropy is incompatible with
our existence because we don't see
perfection wherever we look. We we
aspire to we also know that and that
there's clumps of of dark matter but we
know that we know exactly exactly. So
it's kind of what's called we are clumps
of matter. We are clumps of matter
ourselves. So the questions is asking
why what is that significant of? And
it's basically related to the fact that
we formed in a region where there was an
excess of dark matter. Where did that
excess of dark matter know where to
coagulate though? That's where inflation
comes in because all fields, all quantum
fields have tiny fluctuations in them.
They're not, they are not isotropic
either. Quantum physics enable this
universe. That's right. We are quantum
fluctuation. We are the product of
quantum if inflation is right. We
shouldn't presuppose that it is. We're
looking to see if there is or not. So
yeah, so that those pools of dark matter
knew where to coagulate because of the
fluctuations in the quantum field. So
now these fluctuations are they
disruptions in the field itself that
create something pops out of the field
and that's the so the universe itself is
it just one big field
according to some according to some that
the that the universe is an a particular
instantiation of these conditions of our
quantum field in what's called the
multiverse. When we were kids, there was
just a universe. Right now, there's a
multiverse, which some say should be
more encompassing. Just as we know we're
just one star, one planet, there's one
many, many billions of galaxies. There
could be trillions or an infinite number
of universes. But where do they inhabit?
They inhabit the multiverse. The
multiverse is the collection of all
points in four-dimensional spaceime and
maybe higher spacetime that could ever
will exist. So, yeah. So, we are a
fluctuation in that greater space.
You're absolutely right. And then within
those fluctuations, it's like waves in
the ocean. They're waves upon waves upon
waves and we are the manifestation of
this infinite series of wave trains that
perhaps dates back to the big bang
itself. So Chuck, as insulting as it
sounds to accuse someone of being a
fluctuation is actually quite the
compliment,
cosmically speaking. Look at that. All
right, good question there for just a
couple more. All right, this is Brandon
Christian. Brandon Christian says,
"Hello, Dr. Tyson, Lord Nice, Dr.
Kading." This is Brandon from New
Jersey. My question today is do we have
any idea what could possibly be on the
other side of the CMBB? Would it be
considered a part of our universe if we
were to discover it or would it be
something else altogether? Ah okay. So
the CMBB is the shell of photons. It's a
it's a it's a fictitious shell of
photons that are coming to us from a
particular event. What do you mean
fictitious? How does that word show up
in your send? Well, because it's it's an
artificial um it's a non there's no
place you can go where the CMBB is,
which is what the question is asking,
right? The CNB is a representative of an
event that occurred. It's the event at
which the very first electrons fused
with the very first protons making the
very first atom hydrogen. When that
happened, the universe became
transparent to those waves of light that
were existing beforehand. Those waves of
photon then can free stream and come
towards our telescopes. They come in all
directions. So, it's a moment. As you
look back in space, you're looking back
in time. So, it's a moment in time. And
it looks like a shell to us. We look out
and we see a shell of photons. A little
bit hotter here, a little bit colder
there, but on average 2.726 Kelvin
above absolute zero. There tiny
fluctuations in that. So, beyond that
just means earlier in time. So, yes,
there were things earlier in time, but
it was a pretty boring life. It was a
pretty boring before that 200 nearly
400,000 years before that. Yeah. So for
400,000 years there was nothingness
except for there was protons and
neutrons and plasma and so forth and and
electrons but there was no cosmic event.
There's no place there's no there there.
Well the universe was just glowing at
these different temperatures. Exactly.
It was a plasma. It was a almost uniform
plasma. Okay. Expanding cooling and then
shifting and waveling. Red shifting and
wave. There you go. Wow. All right.
Super cool. This is 1701 Cara who says
greetings from Tennessee Dr. Tyson and
Comrade. Nice. Why you got to make me
Russian?
I have a cosmic query regarding the Higs
field. Is the current model of the Higs
field evenly distributed or could there
be areas in spaceime where the field is
more dense? Uhhuh. That's a great
question. I like that. Could that mean
that it's giving different masses to
particles over here than over there?
Wouldn't that be wild? That'd be a
messed up universe though.
What mass are you?
today or yesterday, right? So, a good
friend of mine, Matt Straler, guys
should have him on. He wrote a wonderful
book about this called Waves in an
Impossible Sea and it's all about the
Higs field. I'm glad that you just like
that impossible word. I know. I love it.
That's You'd be surprised how many books
have the word impossible. So, the Higs
field is what and that's why it's
impressive. Most people talk about the
Higs Bzon. That's not what's so
fundamental. The Higs Bzon is just one
instantiation, one creation moment of a
particular fluctuation of this field
called the Higsfield. Yes, it could vary
from time to time. And the most exciting
thing is that it's what's called a
scalar field. I don't want to get too
technical, but there's that's the first
and only scalar field that we know
about. The other one that's postulated,
but not known yet to exist. We hope we
can, you know, shed some light on it, no
pun intended, is the inflaton field.
Those are scalar fields. They don't have
what are called vector properties. They
don't have properties. They only have a
value. Like the temperature in this room
is a scalar. It's a point. Every point
in space, there's a value. You know, uh
30 degrees Celsius. It's kind of hot
over here. You know, I'm talking it gets
even hotter. But the the point is it's a
number at every point. But the Higs
field is a special case like that. The
other types of field like firmians,
quarks and other types of of fields in
photon fields, they are not. They have a
sort of direction at each point in
spaceime. So the like a gravitational
field has a value and a direction that
it wants to pull you. Right. So so this
just has a value. Exactly. Okay. Okay.
Yep. So why do we care about that? Um so
if it did vary, it could be connected
the two the Higsfield and the Infotton.
So that would be really exciting. It
would say that the particle the field
that is responsible for giving inertia
and mass to massive particles was in
existence and coupled somehow to the
origin of the universe itself. So maybe
there's some connection between the
masses of all particles that were are or
ever will be and and this initial phase
of the universe called the inflation.
Something we haven't figured out yet
because the the all the masses look
pretty random. Yeah. Yeah. We have no
fundamental theory that predicts of the
masses of particles in the universe.
Exactly. That's a great question. All
right. Eric Venus and he says, "Yes,
like the planet and the
goddess." He says, "I understand that as
we look further into the universe, we're
looking further back in time. What have
we learned so far about the early
universe that we can expect to impact
life on Earth in the near future?" So,
is there anything looking back that we
can use looking forward? Um, I like
that. Yeah. So, um, we we there's a lot
of mysteries that we still don't know
about. We don't know how the very first
galaxies formed out of nothingness that
was left over from the CMB. We don't
know exactly how they went through this
transition. It's called the cosmic dark
ages. So just as we learn about history,
we learn about, you know, the the actual
medieval dark ages that impacts
decisions that we can make as a society.
So too, I think learning about how the
early universe evolved, the types of
physics that were in play. And yes, if
there is as some hinting uh there are
some hints that actually some of the
bulk properties of the universe, most
particularly dark energy is evolving, we
need to know that. We need to know was
it different in the past? Was dark
energy uh different value than it has
today? was the Hubble con. If you
thought it was constant for the whole
universe and you later and we now might
be true that it has changed in the past,
it could change in the future. Exactly.
And that could involve the properties of
the spaceime itself called vacuum energy
of the of the universe itself. And that
could lead to again, you know, a
different scenario for the end of the
universe. Everyone always talks about
the beginning of the big rip, the big
crunch. We don't know what would happen.
But, you know, as I say, keep paying
your taxes because could be another
trillion years before we find the
answer. And I and another fast bit to
that. It's not as dramatic as your
answer, but I came of age when we had
cataloges of peculiar galaxies. And they
were called peculi. We didn't know what
the hell they were. Only in the era of
computing were we able to simulate what
must have happened to ordinary galaxies
to make them look like that cuz they're
colliding with each other. Train wrecks.
And so once we learned that that had
happened in the past to create this
catalog of peculiar galaxies, we now
say, "Hey, wait a minute. We're we're
headed towards Andromeda. We're going to
be one of these simulations that
somebody else says, "Hey, Dave, right?
Some future graduates." In the future in
the future, say, "Hey, look at those two
galaxies over there. Isn't that
beautiful?" Wow. Why? Look, they didn't
always look like a sombrero. Why Why are
there so many Kardashians in that in
Milk Drama? Okay, one more. Last one.
Matt Nukem says this. Hello, Dr. Tyson.
Dr. Keing Lord nice. My name is Matt
Nukem like Duke Nukem and I'm from San
Diego, California. San Diego. That's
your hometown. I mean your current
hometown. I'm curious about Simon's
observatory ability to detect new
particles. How do you know what to look
for? And how does it collect that data?
Cheers from a fellow science educator.
Can you discover things you're not
looking for? That's a side light to that
question. Can you predict serendipity?
Uh so so the CNB itself was discovered
accidentally. They weren't looking for
this glow of the big bang uh it
aftermath. Uh so it's actually great but
there are what I love about the Simons
observatory is that there are things
we're swinging for the fences on. We
don't know if inflation took place if we
see it. It could be the same hull has
happened with bicycle which is for our
international audience when you swing
for the fences it's a baseball reference
and it means you're swinging for a very
deep home run and so you might you might
strike out. Yeah. When you swing that
way, you might strike out. But if you
connect all the way. So yeah, for
international listeners, think a cricket
century. That's what Oh, that's it.
That'll be even better. Look at that.
Um, so we're going for the cricket
century if you like. Um, but there's
things that are guaranteed to happen.
They're guaranteed to know about and
that's the only particle of dark matter.
Do you know that we've detected dark
matter? There's dark matter detection.
It's called the nutrino. Nutrino has
every property of dark matter. It just
doesn't make up enough to so-called, you
know, make the universe flat and so
forth. But we've detected dark matter.
However, embarrassingly enough,
shamefully enough for physicists with
our 17 elementary particles. We don't
know the mass of three of those 17. We
know the mass exquisitly accurately for
the other 14. The Higs boson, the
electron, etc., what don't we know? We
don't know the mass of the three types
of nutrinos, the three nutrino flavors.
We have a lower bound and we have an
upper bound, but we don't have a
measurement. It's like someone looking
at Chuck and saying, "Oh, you're
somewhere between, you know, uh, 1 inch
tall and 1,000 ft tall." like it's
interesting but it's
true. Yeah, it's not true but not
useful. That's a beautiful way to phrase
it. So, what we're going to go after is
the because we can take these early
images of dark matter and the
composition of the universe that is
affected by them. We can effectively
weigh the nutrino by getting enough of
them together. They're very light.
They're a million times less massive
than the electron at least. They could
be even less. We can for sure constrain
their properties, weigh them if you
will, but only by collecting them on the
universe's most grand scales. literally
to weigh enough of them, you need to
measure a huge fraction of the
universe's volume. And that's what we're
going to do. So, we're guaranteed to
make an imprint on that and detect not
new particles perhaps, but uh we could
possibly detect new particles. We just
don't know if they're out there. And
that's why serendipity is so hard to
predict. Wow. That sounded like one of
Yogi Bar's predictions. It's hard to
make predictions, especially about the
future.
When you come to a fork in the road,
take it. Yes. There you go.
This conversation about the beginnings
of
things reminds me just of how
interesting that question
is. We can spend our all our lives
studying what is what already exists.
What will become of what already exists.
What makes that scientifically
accessible is that you can find some
other object that's like it and do a
different experiment on that to check
for what properties it has. Check for
how it will respond to whatever you do
to it to see what it becomes in the
future. We can do all of this. That's
what most of science is. But there's a
subset of scientists that are not
content with knowing what something is
or what it will be.
They want to know where it came from.
What are its
origins? Sure, we did it for the Earth.
There was a day we didn't know where the
Earth came from or the Sun, but we found
other planets. We found other stars. We
see them being born. And our star looks
like that. We say that's probably how
our star was born. Okay. How about the
galaxy? Well, we've got JWST helping us
there. How did galaxies form? There's a
point in the early universe where all
that would have happened. We we got top
people working on that. But you keep
doing this and you reach a point where
well, how did the universe begin? Is
there another another universe to
compare it with? No. Is there some some
No. What do you do? You say, well, maybe
there's a
multiverse that would account for a
beginning of our universe. But then all
that does is push the origins question
back one more
notch in the
past. Fine. You can tell me how this
universe got here. Now tell me how the
multiverse got here. And whatever made
that, tell me how that got
here. That's what makes questions of
origins so
challenging and so
fulfilling. when you finally arrive at
those
answers. And that's a cosmic
perspective. This has been a cosmic
queries CMBB edition. That's what it is.
That's what it was. That's what it is.
And that's what it will be. Brian,
thanks for coming. All right. And we can
find you online where
brianken.com/star talk. I've got some
special giveaways for your listeners as
well. Whoa. What? Look at that. Not
borrows meteorites, but other types of
meteorites. What? He's the only guest
that comes here and leaves swag. That's
amazing.
Well, I love what you guys do.
Seriously, I love what you guys do. You
do the most important thing, which is to
teach the audience, teach the public how
important science is to know. Yeah.
Yeah. And you also your your book that
you losing the Nobel Prize, losing the
Nobel Prize into the impossible, think
like a Nobel Prize winner. And then in
the fall, coming out on my birthday,
September 9th, is uh focus like a Nobel
Prize winner. It's a self-help guide for
STEM nerds like me and Neil and and
maybe like you. Sounds like the
publishers milking that subtitle there.
Go through life like a Nobel Prize
winner, right? Yeah. Drive like a Nobel
Prize. Exactly. Exactly. Cook breakfast
like a Nobel Prize. Exercise like a
Nobel Prize. You guys are giving me
ideas. I got a franchise that for all
you guys can do the blurbs on the back.
Yeah. You need to come up with one that
says lay on the couch and watch TV like
a Nobel Prize. That one will be a
bestseller. I guarantee you. I guarantee
you that.
All right. Uh Chuck Brian, always good.
Always a pleasure. Until next time, this
has been Star Talk Cosmic Queries
edition. As always, I bid you to keep
looking up.
[Music]